Trim down and update the development workflow (#729)
dxw/playbook: guides/development-workflow.md

### Development principles

#### Communicate frequently

- learn from each other
- make shared decisions
- prevent duplication
- solve problems quicker

#### Two pairs of eyes

> All code we write should be reviewed by at least one peer

Author: I think there is probably a discussion on the semantics of what "production" code and "prototypes" are defined as. For me, if they are hosted on the internet then they are in production and suspetible to security exploits then they are in production. Of course it depends on the depth of the prototype but for example, a user or member of the public could use it and enter a _reused_ password of theirs which is then sent to https://webhook.site/.

I don't think this is the right place to have that level of conversation but for now I think adding in "production" raises the question of "what is the alternative to production?".

> All code we write should be reviewed by at least one peer

Reviewer: I think it's worth having this discussion at some point, but happy for it to be deferred to another time.

- build shared understanding
- build shared knowledge of code bases
- ship safer and higher quality code
- learn new skills and techniques

#### Share our progress

> All code we write is represented in Trello (or similar) so that we can:

Reviewer 2: I think it's good practice for it to be true for projects where multiple people are working together on something. Without it, the product management and prioritisation is basically impossible.

I think Trello only being used for active client projects is fine. Support work is represented by Zendesk tickets, which I think is fine. Internal projects often have Trello boards. I'd like to explore using the task management within Productive for those at some point.

Maybe it's "most code" instead of "all code"?

> All code we write is represented in Trello (or similar) so that we can:

Author: 👍 I have updated this to be more explicit that it's important for "teams sprinting on client work" to use Trello however support work uses Zendesk.

> ### Development principles

Author: [These ones?](https://github.com/dxw/playbook/blob/8a48029d3b1ec070ccc151ebc11dc108b4bd5f74/_includes/sections/our-professions/development.md). They look like a more recent version with some overlap.

> ### Development principles

Reviewer: Yup. Those ones.

> ### Development principles

Author: @erbridge @evilstreak I've added [a new comit to focus on this additional consolidation task](https://github.com/dxw/playbook/pull/729/commits/32e92eadea02d19d7e8933dc331009bf3c073be1). I wonder what we do about the 2 remaining principles that didn't live in the profession. 

For me, mechanisms to ensure client communication and a basic assurance step are still relevant and important. 

Perhaps they are more process than principle? I think either we make that distinction here or we chose now to work out why they aren't important and remove them?

> ### Development principles

Author: I've consolidated these as well.

### Development principles

> [Development principles can be found in the development profession.](../_includes/sections/our-professions/development.md#development-team-principles)

Author: When I test this locally it doesn't work but the former does so I'm not so sure.

### Start work on a new story

1. assign yourself to the Trello card
1. move the card to indicate you've started work
1. [make a new branch from the active development branch](#how-to-make-a-branch)

> 1. write testable code that meets the acceptance criteria

Reviewer: Testable code or tested code?

- find and read through the pull request, carrying out a
  [code review](#code-review)
  - if you think it's ready:
    - leave your feedback (positive comments are great to receive)
    - approve the pull request
  - if you think it's not ready:
    - leave your feedback
    - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

GitHub offers us a number of options when finalising a review. These may be
interpreted and used differently depending on style but a good rule of thumb to
get started could be:

- Approve - I am confident that this pull request can safely be merged in. I MAY
  also leave optional suggestions which the reviewer MAY want to consider
- Comment - I may not be confident in the change, in which case I should explain
  why this SHOULD NOT be merged yet and what SHOULD be considered. Alternatively
  I might not feel confident enough to approve this pull request but MAY have
  suggestions that SHOULD be considered
- Request changes (not available on GitLab) - This may be used to further
  indicate that this pull request SHOULD NOT be merged. It may contain severe
  issues such as security concerns or bugs which might have a serious impact.

>   This option is used to explicitly nullify any other review that chose approval

Reviewer: 👍

1. link the Trello card to the new pull request, linking directly or by using
   the Trello
   [power up](https://help.trello.com/article/1021-integrating-trello-with-zendesk)
1. move the card to indicate it's now ready for review by a peer

### Reviewing another developer's pull request

- move the Trello card to indicate you're now looking at it

> - find and read the Trello card's acceptance criteria

Author: I think there should always be a user need _or_ acceptance criteria (preferably both) so I've made a slightly different edit. At a basic level a user need should help the reviewer know what should be be achieveable even if there are no detailed AC. I don't agree that cards should have neither and that we might suggest that that be expected practice.

> - find and read the Trello card's acceptance criteria

Reviewer: What I'm thinking about is that sometimes the user needs exist but haven't been added to the card by the original author. I don't want to encourage an existing habit, which is "this card isn't well defined because it's missing ACs - please fix it before I can pick it up, tech lead" or similar. Adding ACs or user needs might be part of doing the work for the card and that should be ok.

> - find and read the Trello card's acceptance criteria

Author: I definitely agree with that.

   git push origin <branch-name>
   ```

1. create a [pull request](#pull-requests) into the active development branch
1. link the Trello card to the new pull request, linking directly or by using
   the Trello
   [power up](https://help.trello.com/article/1021-integrating-trello-with-zendesk)
1. update the card to indicate it's now ready for review by a peer

### Reviewing another developer's pull request

- update the Trello card to indicate you're now looking at it
- find and read the Trello card's user need or acceptance criteria
- find and read through the pull request, carrying out a
  [code review](#code-review)
  - if you think it's ready:
    - leave your feedback (positive comments are great to receive)
    - approve the pull request
  - if you think it's not ready:
    - leave your feedback

>     - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

Reviewer 2: Oh yes, for sure. When you should use approve vs comment vs request changes would be great to have guidance on.

For me:

- Approve: I'm happy for this to be merged, without any of the things I commented on being addressed (or, being merged by the author after they've addresses those things, if that's the way they want to do it)

>     - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

Reviewer: Interesting. I use "comment" to mean "I have suggestions, but it's your call", whereas I'd use a "request changes" if I'm saying "this is actively dangerous, or is going to cause issues if it's merged and would like my comments addressed first, please".

>     - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

Reviewer 2: So we agree on "request changes". When would you use "approve"? Only when you have no suggestions?

>     - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

Author: I no longer ever use "request changes" but prefer to use "approve" or "comment" and make myself very clear with my wording what I expect. I percieve the red cross and demanding tone as needlessly aggressive and not a nice experience.

>     - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

Author: - Approve: I'm happy for it to go, I may have optional suggestions or even low impact suggestons I trust you to action and the prior approval is then a convient mechasim by which no second review is required
- Comment: If I'm passing and don't feel confident enough to make a green decision or if there's any reason I think we must take action and it's important that is rechecked.
- Request changes: never

>     - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

Reviewer: I'd use "approve" when I have no strong suggestions or remarks. It's a scale of comfort for me, I think.
- Approve: I'd have no objections to this being merged as is, but here are maybe some extra things to think about
- Comment: I have thoughts on this thing that I'd probably be a bit grumpy if you just ignored, but my feedback isn't showstopping if someone else thinks it's good to go
- Request changes: I would consider it an issue if this got merged because it's actively dangerous (I basically never do this level of review)

>     - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

Author: Worth pointing out that I don't think GitLab has "Request changes" but instead looks to only have comment or approve functions.

Given we have subtle differences in our application of these tools and I presume the rest of the team will be similar, I don't think it will benefit us to be too prescriptive here. That said I do think we should reference _a_ way to interpret and use these tools for those looking for guidance. I will add that with the suggestion that if it becomes a hot potatoe it should probably be extracted into a new pull request.

>     - consider letting the author know by Slack that it's back with them

Author: I've tried to summarise where I think we got to:

* Approve - I am confident that this pull request can safely be merged in. I MAY also leave optional suggestions which the reviewer MAY want to consider
* Comment - I may not be confident in the change, in which case I should explain why this SHOULD NOT be merged yet and what SHOULD be considered. Alternatively I might not feel confident enough to approve this pull request but MAY have suggestions that SHOULD be considered
* Request changes (not available on GitLab) - This may be used to further indicate that this pull request SHOULD NOT be merged. It may contain severe issues such as security concerns or bugs which might have a serious impact. This option is used to explicitly nullify any other review that chose approval

we build, test and deploy as frequently as possible.

We do this by using services such as Chef, TravisCI or GitHub Actions which are
configured to listen for Git pushes and then initiate an automatic deployment.

Whilst these deployments should be automatic it should be noted that they can
take a short time to run.

### Staging

Staging deployments are automatic and should be initiated when each pull request
is merged to the working branch, usually `develop`.

### Production

Production deployments are done by manually by merging into `master`.

We do not have a standard release process though recent services follow a
process such as
[this example](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/buy-for-your-school/blob/develop/doc/release-process.md).

> A basic process:

Reviewer: I take this suggestion back, btw.

1. review what work is currently awaiting deployment by looking at Trello, if

>    there are any unaccepted stories then you should hold off

Reviewer 3: I would say that things wouldn't be merged into `main` until they're accepted. If it's on `main`, it should be deployable.

1. update the [changelog](#tracking-changes)
1. let the team know you're deploying to Production
1. tag the merge commit with the version matching the
   [changelog](#tracking-changes)

> 1. verify the deployment has been successful with smoke tests

Reviewer 3: Smoke tests could be automated (and ideally should be), so I'd argue against this inclusion.

```
git fetch
git checkout -b <branch-name> origin/develop
```

### Naming the branch

Having a convention allows for:

- all branches connected to a story or ticket are easily connected now and in
  the future
- others can easily identify the intent of the contents without having to
  interpret a branch name
- encourages small and concise branches which keeps the focus on the type of

>   change being made

Reviewer 2: Makes it clearer when a branch is doing more than one type of thing? There's probably a requirement for team pressure first, with reviewers noticing and commenting on the mismatch, before everyone internalises that lesson and applies it proactively to their own work.

>   change being made

Reviewer: Perhaps. There's an implicit hierarchy here, though. Like I'd expect some features or fixes to also include some refactors and for that to be fine. When is it ok for a branch to do multiple things, and when is it not?

#### Prefixes

- **Feature**

  A branch that adds a new feature, as defined by the specified story

  Example: `feature/523797477-add-logging-to-registration`

- **Fix**

  A branch that corrects a problem in a feature already merged into `develop`

  Example: `fix/423797477-logging-happens-in-both-environments`

- **Chore**

  Chore branches are used for routine tasks for maintaining the application like
  package upgrades, they don't provide a new feature or fix an existing one

  Example: `chore/1934729239-reduce-caching-for-contact-details`

- **Refactor**

  Refactor branches only include changes that do not change the systems outward
  behaviour or interface.

  Example: `refactor/243234-api-serves-response-more-efficiently`

- **Hotfix**

  A branch that adds an urgent fix to a problem that affects production. These
  branches are based on `master` and do not go via `develop`, so must be also be

>   merged into `develop` when deployed

Reviewer 3: I 100% agree with this, we should think about this as a separate recommendation.

  change being made. If you are adding a new feature and fix something along the

>   way, that _should_ be 2 commits instead of 1

Author: I actually think this was originally meant to be "branches" and "branch names" 👍

> #### Convention

Author: I'm not sure how people are doing this at the moment. I probably use `chore`. I'll add a new block to provide some guidance.

> ## Committing

Author: I would love some attention on this section in particular.

Author: I've included some words to help us think about what should go into commits.

I think step-by-step instructions for _how_ to perform tasks might be too much for this document. It's difficult to know how far to go with instructions (and when to stop) and as you say they're only applicable for git CLI users, you'd need different instructions for GUI users.

## Committing

Good commits are small, focused and self-contained.

Code is written once, changed occasionally but read frequently. By taking the
time to document what we've built and why, we enable others to build their
shared understanding of the codebase too. Once we have a stronger shared
understanding we are able to make more informed decisions, avoid repeated
effort, receive more valuable feedback and spot new opportunities.

### What to include

Helpful questions to ask when organising the content of our commits:

- is the code focused on a single problem? Commits should be small and focused
  rather than trying to do multiple things at once
- is the code refactoring existing behaviour or introducing a behavioural
  change? Refactorings can often be noisy and make it hard to see the new
  changes within. Split commits based on the the type of change
- are the unit tests included? Each new commit should keep the test suite green
- is a
  [changelog entry](https://github.com/dxw/tech-team-rfcs/blob/main/rfc-019-use-changelogs-to-track-changes.md)

>   or architecture decision record necessary?

Reviewer 3: I think this might be worthy of a separate addition outside this PR to talk about ADRs and how we use them.

### What to write

Taking the time to write good commits is as valuable as writing good code. They
record the story of each repository, line by line, which makes it possible to
reason about now and in the future.

Helpful questions to ask when writing a commit:

- what is the **new** behaviour of the application?
- have I written down **why** I chose this approach over the others?
- are there relevant links I could include to help the next person understand?
- have I documented any risks, foreseen pitfalls or potential consequences?
- are there relevant links I could include to help the reader get the same

>   information I had when making my decision?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  information I had when making my decision?
- have I called out any subtleties in the implementation that are worth drawing attention to or explaining?
```

> ## Code review

Author: I would love some attention on this section in particular.

Code reviews help us ship better quality code and provide an opportunity to
learn from each other.

, maintain design consistency, preempt future bugs, check security
considerations and to generally level up the proposal. When performing a code
review we:

- check the pull request is descriptive, explains the story and doesn't assume
  knowledge. Some templates ask for screenshots to help illustrate the change
  before and after

> - check the code is safe (Brakeman should be checking this automatically)

Author: I've included a link to OWASP top ten 👍

```

```
# Before
Fixed the form

# After

> Food order form works with special characters

Reviewer 3: Agree, but perhaps let's do a followup PR on commit message style rather than extending the life of this one?

## Code review

Code reviews help us ship better quality code and provide an opportunity to
learn from each other.

### How to begin

To help review code changes you can

> [enable split review within GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-comparing-branches-in-pull-requests#diff-view-options).

Reviewer: Can we be clearer that this pointing out an option that you may find helpful, rather than something you should definitely do? Or did you intend for it to be a recommendation?

Pull requests include a lot buttons and information that are all competing for
our attention. There are several ways we can view the information so having a

> plan can be helpful:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plan can be helpful. Here is an example of what a good and thorough review looks like:
```

1. read the description to help you understand what we are doing and why. If
   it's unclear, stopping to find out will likely lead to a more valuable review
1. check the status is "Open" and that all "Checks" have passed. If this isn't
   the case it may not be ready for a review. We want to review a stable set of
   changes that aren't still being worked on. Ask the author if in doubt
1. scan through the "Files changed" tab briefly to peak at the new state of the
   system to get your bearings, we are looking at the general size of the change
   as well as the different entities involved (optional)
1. first pass (read) - Go to the the "Commit" tab, here we will see all the
   individual commits with the oldest at the top. Go into the oldest commit and
   start navigating using the "Next" button. Read the description and the
   contents with the aim of understanding each change and its rationale. Make
   quick notes to yourself for areas of interest you'd like to come back to, the

>    trick is to make these low cost so we can maintain focus. Writing thoughtful

Reviewer: A tip from me is to add the notes as a comment at the top of the commit so it's where you are, then delete it when you're done.

   feedback takes time and we may even find that the situation changes in later
   commits, making the feedback redundant
1. second pass (review) - Now is the time to leave feedback. Go back to the

>    oldest commit and this time as you go through think about the following,

Reviewer: Is it worth explaining why we do a review commit by commit?

Reviewer 3: I would be interested in a discussion of this as a followup; I tend to look at the PR as a whole, and dive into commit-by-commit if it's particularly complex, but that's just me.

   leaving comments on the nearest line where appropriate:
   - did you have a note for this commit? Now is the time to explore and test
     any alternative ideas before making recommendations
   - use the [following checklist](#what-to-look-for) to help assess the
     contents

> 1. submit your review and let the author know

Reviewer: I find it's useful to do a penultimate step of doing the third pass of the files changes to see everything together. Sometimes there's insight you get from seeing the sum of all changes instead of each piece.

> Tip: You can add `?w=1` to the end of the URL to strip our noisy whitespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tip: You can add `?w=1` to the end of the URL to strip out noisy whitespace.
```

### What to look for

When performing a code review we:

- check the pull request is descriptive, explains the story and doesn't assume

>   knowledge. Some templates ask for screenshots to help illustrate the change

Reviewer: Which knowledge is safe to assume? Should the description make sense to someone who knows nothing about the project? Someone who's an active contributor? Something in between? It would be good to set a baseline target audience here, I think.

  before and after
- check the code is safe
  ([OWASP top ten](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/)) (Brakeman should be
  checking for obvious issues automatically)
- check the code follows a consistent style (Standard should be checking this
  automatically)

> - check the code is readable (did you find it easy to build an understanding?)

Reviewer: Worth calling out "variables and methods are well named" here? I'd hope people would be looking for consistency in naming conventions and potential naming clashes or similarities that could be confusing.

- check the code for maintainability
  ([SOLID principles](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/conceptual_articles/s-o-l-i-d-the-first-five-principles-of-object-oriented-design))

> - check the code is tested (Test suites and Coverage tools should checked

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- check the code is tested (Test suites and Coverage tools should check
```

  automatically)
- check the code is unlikely to introduce future bugs (this is tricky to do and
  it's okay if you don't find any as we fail fast and fix)
- check the commits are reasonably small and focused towards making one change.

>   They should not include unexpected or unrelated changes

Reviewer: Worth giving some guidance about what to do if they do?

- check the commits messages are descriptive
- check the [changelog](#tracking-changes) has been updated

### Writing feedback

It is not important that a story be implemented exactly how you would have done
it, only that it meets the acceptance criteria. When we find problems we give
feedback to the author rather than fix things ourselves inline with our
principle of ['Own your code'](#own-your-code).

It’s important that code reviews have a constructive and amicable tone. A
helpful mindset is one of assuming good intent. Be mindful that you might not
have all the information and so ask questions such as "Why did you do this like
X?" rather than "You should do it this like Y!".

Summarise your feedback. Be clear on which points require further action and
which are advisory. You should both feel confident about what's necessary and
what to expect in order to move forward.

[Thoughtbot's](https://github.com/thoughtbot/guides/tree/master/code-review)

> code review guide contains good rules for keeping the tone positive.

Reviewer: Should we have a similar guide for how to respond to feedback on a PR? What do you do if you disagree with some feedback, for instance?

Reviewer: Not necessary in this change, I think, btw.

  [Sass Guidelines - Syntax and formatting](https://sass-guidelin.es/#syntax--formatting)
- JavaScript - [Standard](https://standardjs.com/)

When joining an existing code base we suggest following any existing code style
rather than switch over to ours.

---

> ## Pull requests

Author: I would love some attention on this section in particular.

Reviewer 2: I think this is good. Other things I like to include:

- a recommendation for how to review (commit-by-commit or as-a-whole, ignoring whitespace changes, …)
- my thoughts on what's next, whether that's future refactorings, possible features, or when you expect this change to reach breaking point due to other changes in the future (eg "this is good for now, but after we've added a couple more WidgetServices we should plan to rewrite the Flooble system because …")

Author: By the contents of your feedback I'm going to guess it's to do with the code reviews rather than pull requests. I'll address them there and hope that's right 👍

Reviewer 2: These are things I try to include as an author of a PR, rather than when code reviewing someone else's PR.

A good pull request should:

> - describe the problem without assuming the reader has existing context

Reviewer 2: Related: should link to the story card (eg in Trello) for extra context and history, but should provide everything within the PR description to understand the change (ie linking to Trello is not enough)

- highlight the changes being made
- describe and bring attention to particular difficulties or areas that you
  particularly want the opinion of the reviewer
- for user facing changes include screenshots of the before and after

> - the changes should be focused on meeting the acceptance criteria

Reviewer 2: This is less prescriptive than the previous version, which is good. I think it could be more encouraging of PRs which address only part of the acceptance criteria for a card. Maybe it's about being clear which acceptance criteria the changes meet?

For example, a refactoring which will enable the feature work to be done, but doesn't actually meet any acceptance criteria yet. It's good to ship that as its own thing (as per the point below) rather than waiting until the feature is built on top of it.

Or, after realising part way through development that the feature could be shipped as a two part change, being clear that the first PR only meets one or two of the acceptance criteria.

Author: Good points, will add more 👍

- focused on a single problem and preferring to split additional problems into
  other pull requests, the smaller the pull request, the easier it is to be
  reviewed and the quicker it is likely to be merged
- updates the [changelog](#tracking-changes) if it's a significant change

> Real examples:

Author: Is this a good idea? I thought real, relatable examples would be more helpful than fictional ones. Plus it is nice to shine a light on good work. 

Sorry if you're not listed, I know I missed a few as I couldn't find recent work. Please do make suggestions and I'll get them in.

  [Sass Guidelines - Syntax and formatting](https://sass-guidelin.es/#syntax--formatting)
- JavaScript - [Standard](https://standardjs.com/)

> When joining an existing code base we suggest following any existing code style

Reviewer: I'd suggest removing the specific code standards from this guide because they'll end up out of date (we use Prettier for JS for example).

Reviewer 3: I think its useful to point out our defaults. Though they should be up to date :)

> When joining an existing code base we suggest following any existing code style
> rather than switch over to ours.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When joining an existing code base we suggest following any existing code style
rather than changing it.
```

I don't know if we have an "ours" or should, really.

> rather than switch over to ours.

Reviewer: If we join an existing codebase without style linting, we should probably think about adding some rather than living with it. This might involve investigating what style the existing code is closest to.

[make a pull request](https://help.github.com/articles/using-pull-requests/)
using the project's GitHub/GitLab page.

We link each pull request with the related Trello card to make it easier to
find. We could prefix the card number to the pull request title or link to the
card directly within the description or a comment.

A good pull request should:

> - link to the Trello card for extra context, do not rely on Trello cards alone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- link to the Trello card for extra context, but not rely on Trello cards alone
```

  as they can be easily removed or moved

> - describe the problem without assuming the reader has existing context

Reviewer: The advice given in "what to look for" above could do with being repeated here (or maybe just moved) since you want it when writing the description, primarily.

- highlight the changes being made
- describe and bring attention to particular difficulties or areas that you
  particularly want the opinion of the reviewer
- include screenshots for user facing changes (following the pull request
  template prompts)

> - be clear which acceptance criteria are being met (or if it's a prior
>   refactoring)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- be clear which acceptance criteria are being met and which aren't if there is follow up work to do
```

I don't understand the refactoring bit. Would you be able to reword it?

- explain if a task is being broken down into multiple pull requests and what

>   the review order should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the review order should be
- describe any follow up work or steps that need to be done to complete the task
```

> - be focused on a single problem, preferring to split additional problems into
>   other pull requests, the smaller the pull request, the easier it is to be
>   reviewed and the quicker it is likely to be merged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- be focused on a single problem, preferring to split additional problems into
  other pull requests - the smaller the pull request, the easier it is to be
  reviewed and the quicker it is likely to be merged
```

> - updates the [changelog](#tracking-changes) if it's a significant change

Reviewer: Worth making sure we're consistent between review and author for this. Is it only "significant changes" or any change (as implied by the review guide)?

> - updates the [changelog](#tracking-changes) if it's a significant change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- describe any consequences of the work
- update the [changelog](#tracking-changes) if it's a significant change
```
